docs/tags.md, before:

# YAML Tags, Anchors, and Advanced Features with yaml12

This guide picks up where the “YAML in 2 Minutes” intro leaves off. It
explains what YAML tags are and how to work with them in `yaml12` using
tag handlers. Along the way we also cover complex mapping keys, document
streams, and anchors, so you can handle real-world YAML 1.2.

## Tags in YAML and how yaml12 handles them

Tags annotate any YAML node with extra meaning. In YAML syntax a tag
always starts with `!`, and it appears before the node’s value; it is
not part of the scalar text itself.

`yaml12` preserves tags by wrapping nodes in a `Yaml` object. A `Yaml`
is a small frozen dataclass that carries the parsed `value` (a regular
Python type) and the `tag` string. Here is an example of parsing a tagged scalar:

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, parse_yaml

color = parse_yaml("!color red")
assert isinstance(color, Yaml) and (color.tag, color.value) == ("!color", "red")
```

The presence of a custom tag bypasses the usual scalar typing: the
scalar is returned as a string even if it looks like another type.

```python
assert parse_yaml("! true") == Yaml(value="true", tag="!")
assert parse_yaml("true") is True
```

### Using handlers to transform tagged nodes while parsing

`parse_yaml()` and `read_yaml()` accept `handlers`: a `dict` mapping tag
strings to callables. Handlers run on any matching tagged node. For
tagged scalars the handler receives a plain Python scalar; for tagged
sequences or mappings, it receives a plain list or dict.

Here is an example of using a handler to evaluate `!expr` nodes:

```python
from yaml12 import parse_yaml

handlers = {"!expr": lambda value: eval(str(value))}

assert parse_yaml("!expr 1 + 1", handlers=handlers) == 2
```

Any errors from a handler stop parsing and propagate unchanged:

```python
from yaml12 import parse_yaml

def boom(value):
    raise ValueError("boom")

parse_yaml("!boom 1", handlers={"!boom": boom})  # ValueError("boom")
```

Any tag without a matching handler is left preserved as a `Yaml` object,
and handlers without matching tags are simply unused:

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, parse_yaml

yaml_text = """
- !expr 1 + 1
- !upper yaml is awesome
- !note this tag has no handler
"""

handlers = {
    "!expr": lambda value: eval(str(value)),
    "!upper": str.upper,
    "!lower": str.lower,  # unused
}

out = parse_yaml(yaml_text, handlers=handlers)
assert out == [2, "YAML IS AWESOME", Yaml("this tag has no handler", "!note")]
```

With a tagged sequence or mapping, the handler is called with a plain
list or dict:

```python
from yaml12 import parse_yaml

def seq_handler(value):
    assert value == ["a", "b"]
    return "handled-seq"

def map_handler(value):
    assert value == {"key1": 1, "key2": 2}
    return "handled-map"

yaml_text = """
- !some_seq_tag [a, b]
- !some_map_tag {key1: 1, key2: 2}
"""

out = parse_yaml(
    yaml_text,
    handlers={
        "!some_seq_tag": seq_handler,
        "!some_map_tag": map_handler,
    },
)
assert out == ["handled-seq", "handled-map"]
```

Handlers apply to both values and keys, including the non-specific `!`
tag if you register `"!"`. If a handler raises an exception, parsing
stops and you see the exception unchanged, which makes debugging easy.

Any tag without a matching handler stays as a `Yaml` object, and any
unused handlers are simply ignored. Handlers make it easy to opt into
powerful behaviors while keeping the default parser strict and safe.

### Post-process tags yourself

If you want more control, you can parse without handlers and then walk
the result yourself. For example, here is a tiny post-processor for
`!expr` scalars:

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, parse_yaml

def eval_yaml_expr_nodes(obj):
    if isinstance(obj, Yaml):
        if obj.tag == "!expr":
            return eval(str(obj.value))
        return Yaml(eval_yaml_expr_nodes(obj.value), obj.tag)
    if isinstance(obj, list):
        return [eval_yaml_expr_nodes(item) for item in obj]
    if isinstance(obj, dict):
        return {eval_yaml_expr_nodes(k): eval_yaml_expr_nodes(v) for k, v in obj.items()}
    return obj

raw = parse_yaml("!expr 1 + 1")
assert isinstance(raw, Yaml) and eval_yaml_expr_nodes(raw) == 2
```

Because tags can also appear on mapping keys, postprocessors should walk
dict keys as well (as in the example above). If you transform all tagged
keys into plain hashable scalars, you can rebuild a dict with those new
keys.

## Mappings revisited: non-string keys and `Yaml`

In YAML, mapping keys do not have to be plain strings; any node can be a
key, including booleans, numbers, sequences, or other mappings. For
example, this is valid YAML even though the key is a boolean:

```yaml
true: true
```

When a key can’t be represented directly as a plain Python dict key,
`yaml12` wraps it in `Yaml`. That preserves the original key and makes
it hashable (with equality defined by structure), so it can safely live
in a Python `dict`:

```python
parsed = parse_yaml("true: true")
key = next(iter(parsed))
assert key is True and parsed[key] is True and not isinstance(key, Yaml)
```

For complex key values, YAML uses the explicit mapping-key indicator
`?`:

```yaml
? [a, b]
: tuple
? {x: 1, y: 2}
: map-key
```

Becomes:

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, parse_yaml

yaml_text = """
? [a, b]
: tuple
? {x: 1, y: 2}
: map-key
"""
parsed = parse_yaml(yaml_text)

seq_key, map_key = list(parsed)
assert isinstance(seq_key, Yaml) and seq_key.value == ["a", "b"]
assert isinstance(map_key, Yaml) and map_key.value == {"x": 1, "y": 2}
assert parsed[Yaml(["a", "b"])] == "tuple"
assert parsed[Yaml({"x": 1, "y": 2})] == "map-key"
```

### Tagged mapping keys

Handlers run on keys too, so a handler can turn tagged keys into
friendly Python keys before they are wrapped.

```python
handlers = {"!upper": str.upper}
result = parse_yaml("!upper key: value", handlers=handlers)
assert result == {"KEY": "value"}
```

If a tagged key has no matching handler, it is preserved as a `Yaml`
key:

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, parse_yaml

parsed = parse_yaml("!custom foo: 1")
key = next(iter(parsed))
assert isinstance(key, Yaml) and key.tag == "!custom" and key.value == "foo"
```

If you anticipate tagged mapping keys that you want to process yourself,
walk the `Yaml` keys alongside the values and unwrap them as needed.

## Document streams and markers

Most YAML files contain a single YAML *document*. YAML also supports
*document streams*: multiple documents separated by `---` and
optionally closed by `...`.

### Reading multiple documents

`parse_yaml()` and `read_yaml()` default to `multi=False`. In that mode,
they stop after the first document. When `multi=True`, all documents in
the stream are returned as a list.

```python
doc_stream = """
---
doc 1
---
doc 2
"""

parsed_first = parse_yaml(doc_stream)
parsed_all = parse_yaml(doc_stream, multi=True)
assert (parsed_first, parsed_all) == ("doc 1", ["doc 1", "doc 2"])
```

### Writing multiple documents

`write_yaml()` and `format_yaml()` also default to a single document.
With `multi=True`, the value must be a sequence of documents and the
output uses `---` between documents and `...` after the final one. For
single documents, `write_yaml()` always wraps the body with `---` and a
final `...`, while `format_yaml()` returns just the body.

```python
from yaml12 import format_yaml, write_yaml

docs = ["first", "second"]
text = format_yaml(docs, multi=True)
assert text.startswith("---") and text.rstrip().endswith("...")
write_yaml(docs, path="out.yml", multi=True)
```

When `multi=False`, parsing stops after the first document—even if later
content is not valid YAML. That makes it easy to extract front matter
from files that mix YAML with other text (like Markdown).

```python
rmd_lines = [
    "---",
    "title: Front matter only",
    "params:",
    "  answer: 42",
    "---",
    "# Body that is not YAML",
]
frontmatter = parse_yaml(rmd_lines)
assert frontmatter == {"title": "Front matter only", "params": {"answer": 42}}
```

## Writing YAML with tags

To emit a tag, wrap a value in `Yaml` before calling `format_yaml()` or
`write_yaml()`.

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, write_yaml

tagged = Yaml("1 + x", "!expr")
write_yaml(tagged)
# stdout:
# ---
# !expr 1 + x
# ...
```

Tagged collections or mapping keys work the same way:

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, format_yaml, parse_yaml

mapping = {
    "tagged_value": Yaml(["a", "b"], "!pair"),
    Yaml("tagged-key", "!k"): "v",
}
encoded = format_yaml(mapping)
reparsed = parse_yaml(encoded)

value = reparsed["tagged_value"]
assert isinstance(value, Yaml) and value.tag == "!pair" and value.value == ["a", "b"]

key = next(k for k in reparsed if isinstance(k, Yaml))
assert key.tag == "!k" and key.value == "tagged-key" and reparsed[key] == "v"
```

## Serializing custom Python objects

You can opt into richer domain types by tagging your own objects on
emit and supplying a handler on parse. Here is a round-trip for a
dataclass:

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass, asdict
from yaml12 import Yaml, format_yaml, parse_yaml

@dataclass
class Server:
    name: str
    host: str
    port: int

def encode_server(server: Server) -> Yaml:
    return Yaml(asdict(server), "!server")

def decode_server(value):
    return Server(**value)

servers = [Server("api", "api.example.com", 8000), Server("db", "db.local", 5432)]
yaml_text = format_yaml([encode_server(s) for s in servers])

round_tripped = parse_yaml(yaml_text, handlers={"!server": decode_server})
assert round_tripped == servers
```

By keeping the on-disk representation a plain mapping plus tag, you get a
stable YAML format while still round-tripping your Python types losslessly.

## Anchors

Anchors (`&id`) name a node; aliases (`*id`) copy it. `yaml12` resolves
aliases before returning Python objects.

```python
from yaml12 import parse_yaml

parsed = parse_yaml("""
recycle-me: &anchor-name
  a: b
  c: d

recycled:
  - *anchor-name
  - *anchor-name
""")

first, second = parsed["recycled"]
assert first["a"] == "b" and second["c"] == "d"
```

## Debugging

If you want to inspect how YAML nodes are parsed before conversion to
Python types, use the internal helper `yaml12._dbg_yaml()` to
pretty-print the raw `saphyr::Yaml` structures:

```python
import yaml12

yaml12._dbg_yaml("!custom [1, 2]")
```

`_dbg_yaml` is intended for debugging and may change without notice.

## (Very) advanced tags

The following YAML features are uncommon, but `yaml12` supports them for
full YAML 1.2 compliance.

### Tag directives (`%TAG`)

YAML lets you declare tag handles at the top of a document. The syntax
is `%TAG !<name>! <handle>` and it applies to the rest of the document.

```python
text = """
%TAG !e! tag:example.com,2024:widgets/
---
item: !e!gizmo foo
"""
parsed = parse_yaml(text)
assert parsed["item"].tag == "tag:example.com,2024:widgets/gizmo"
```

You can also declare a global tag prefix, which expands a bare `!`:

```python
text = """
%TAG ! tag:example.com,2024:widgets/
---
item: !gizmo foo
"""
assert parse_yaml(text)["item"].tag == "tag:example.com,2024:widgets/gizmo"
```

### Tag URIs

To bypass handle resolution, use `!<...>` with a valid URI-like string:

```python
parsed = parse_yaml("""
%TAG ! tag:example.com,2024:widgets/
---
item: !<gizmo> foo
""")
assert parsed["item"].tag == "gizmo"
```

### Core schema tags

Tags beginning with `!!` resolve against the YAML core schema handle
(`tag:yaml.org,2002:`). Scalar core tags (`!!str`, `!!int`, `!!float`,
`!!bool`, `!!null`, `!!seq`, `!!map`) add no information when emitting
and are normalized to plain Python values. Informative core tags
(`!!timestamp`, `!!binary`, `!!set`, `!!omap`, `!!pairs`) stay tagged so
you can decide how to handle them.

YAML 1.2 removed these informative tags from the core schema, but they are
still valid tags and occasionally useful. `yaml12` preserves them as `Yaml`
unless you supply a handler to convert them to richer Python types.

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, parse_yaml

yaml_text = """
- !!timestamp 2025-01-01
- !!timestamp 2025-01-01 21:59:43.10-05:00
- !!binary UiBpcyBBd2Vzb21l
"""
parsed = parse_yaml(yaml_text)
assert all(isinstance(item, Yaml) for item in parsed) and (
    parsed[0].tag,
    parsed[2].tag,
) == ("tag:yaml.org,2002:timestamp", "tag:yaml.org,2002:binary")
```

Handlers can convert these to richer Python types:

```python
import base64
from datetime import datetime, timezone
from yaml12 import parse_yaml

def ts_handler(value):
    return datetime.fromisoformat(str(value).replace("Z", "+00:00")).replace(tzinfo=timezone.utc)

def binary_handler(value):
    return base64.b64decode(str(value))

converted = parse_yaml(
    yaml_text,
    handlers={
        "tag:yaml.org,2002:timestamp": ts_handler,
        "tag:yaml.org,2002:binary": binary_handler,
    },
)
assert isinstance(converted[0], datetime) and isinstance(converted[2], (bytes, bytearray))
```

Commit message:

yaml12: Python-sourced Yaml + tag/handler polish
Move the Yaml dataclass into python/yaml12 (bytecode-cached; prints as yaml12.Yaml)
Add internal _set_yaml_class init hook and remove Rust-side exec bootstrap
Normalize handler keys and tags (gizmo, !<gizmo>, !!timestamp)
Improve tag parsing/emission and float scalar formatting
Update docs and tests; rename the PyPI project to py-yaml12

docs/tags.md, after:

# YAML Tags, Anchors, and Advanced Features with yaml12

This guide picks up where the “YAML in 2 Minutes” intro leaves off. It
explains what YAML tags are and how to work with them in `yaml12` using
tag handlers. Along the way we also cover complex mapping keys, document
streams, and anchors, so you can handle real-world YAML 1.2.

## Tags in YAML and how yaml12 handles them

Tags annotate any YAML node with extra meaning. In YAML syntax a tag
always starts with `!`, and it appears before the node’s value; it is
not part of the scalar text itself.

`yaml12` preserves tags by wrapping nodes in a `Yaml` object. A `Yaml`
is a small frozen dataclass that carries the parsed `value` (a regular
Python type) and the `tag` string. Here is an example of parsing a tagged scalar:

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, parse_yaml

color = parse_yaml("!color red")
assert isinstance(color, Yaml) and (color.tag, color.value) == ("!color", "red")
```

The presence of a custom tag bypasses the usual scalar typing: the
scalar is returned as a string even if it looks like another type.

```python
assert parse_yaml("! true") == Yaml(value="true", tag="!")
assert parse_yaml("true") is True
```

### Using handlers to transform tagged nodes while parsing

`parse_yaml()` and `read_yaml()` accept `handlers`: a `dict` mapping tag
strings to callables. Handlers run on any matching tagged node. For
tagged scalars the handler receives a plain Python scalar; for tagged
sequences or mappings, it receives a plain list or dict.

Here is an example of using a handler to evaluate `!expr` nodes:

```python
from yaml12 import parse_yaml

handlers = {"!expr": lambda value: eval(str(value))}

assert parse_yaml("!expr 1 + 1", handlers=handlers) == 2
```

Any errors from a handler stop parsing and propagate unchanged:

```python
from yaml12 import parse_yaml

def boom(value):
    raise ValueError("boom")

parse_yaml("!boom 1", handlers={"!boom": boom})  # ValueError("boom")
```

Any tag without a matching handler is left preserved as a `Yaml` object,
and handlers without matching tags are simply unused:

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, parse_yaml

yaml_text = """
- !expr 1 + 1
- !upper yaml is awesome
- !note this tag has no handler
"""

handlers = {
    "!expr": lambda value: eval(str(value)),
    "!upper": str.upper,
    "!lower": str.lower,  # unused
}

out = parse_yaml(yaml_text, handlers=handlers)
assert out == [2, "YAML IS AWESOME", Yaml("this tag has no handler", "!note")]
```

With a tagged sequence or mapping, the handler is called with a plain
list or dict:

```python
from yaml12 import parse_yaml

def seq_handler(value):
    assert value == ["a", "b"]
    return "handled-seq"

def map_handler(value):
    assert value == {"key1": 1, "key2": 2}
    return "handled-map"

yaml_text = """
- !some_seq_tag [a, b]
- !some_map_tag {key1: 1, key2: 2}
"""

out = parse_yaml(
    yaml_text,
    handlers={
        "!some_seq_tag": seq_handler,
        "!some_map_tag": map_handler,
    },
)
assert out == ["handled-seq", "handled-map"]
```

Handlers apply to both values and keys, including the non-specific `!`
tag if you register `"!"`. If a handler raises an exception, parsing
stops and you see the exception unchanged, which makes debugging easy.

Any tag without a matching handler stays as a `Yaml` object, and any
unused handlers are simply ignored. Handlers make it easy to opt into
powerful behaviors while keeping the default parser strict and safe.

### Post-process tags yourself

If you want more control, you can parse without handlers and then walk
the result yourself. For example, here is a tiny post-processor for
`!expr` scalars:

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, parse_yaml

def eval_yaml_expr_nodes(obj):
    if isinstance(obj, Yaml):
        if obj.tag == "!expr":
            return eval(str(obj.value))
        return Yaml(eval_yaml_expr_nodes(obj.value), obj.tag)
    if isinstance(obj, list):
        return [eval_yaml_expr_nodes(item) for item in obj]
    if isinstance(obj, dict):
        return {eval_yaml_expr_nodes(k): eval_yaml_expr_nodes(v) for k, v in obj.items()}
    return obj

raw = parse_yaml("!expr 1 + 1")
assert isinstance(raw, Yaml) and eval_yaml_expr_nodes(raw) == 2
```

Because tags can also appear on mapping keys, postprocessors should walk
dict keys as well (as in the example above). If you transform all tagged
keys into plain hashable scalars, you can rebuild a dict with those new
keys.

## Mappings revisited: non-string keys and `Yaml`

In YAML, mapping keys do not have to be plain strings; any node can be a
key, including booleans, numbers, sequences, or other mappings. For
example, this is valid YAML even though the key is a boolean:

```yaml
true: true
```

When a key can’t be represented directly as a plain Python dict key,
`yaml12` wraps it in `Yaml`. That preserves the original key and makes
it hashable (with equality defined by structure, including mapping key order), so it can safely live
in a Python `dict`:

```python
parsed = parse_yaml("true: true")
key = next(iter(parsed))
assert key is True and parsed[key] is True and not isinstance(key, Yaml)
```

For complex key values, YAML uses the explicit mapping-key indicator
`?`:

```yaml
? [a, b]
: tuple
? {x: 1, y: 2}
: map-key
```

Becomes:

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, parse_yaml

yaml_text = """
? [a, b]
: tuple
? {x: 1, y: 2}
: map-key
"""
parsed = parse_yaml(yaml_text)

seq_key, map_key = list(parsed)
assert isinstance(seq_key, Yaml) and seq_key.value == ["a", "b"]
assert isinstance(map_key, Yaml) and map_key.value == {"x": 1, "y": 2}
assert parsed[Yaml(["a", "b"])] == "tuple"
assert parsed[Yaml({"x": 1, "y": 2})] == "map-key"
```

### Tagged mapping keys

Handlers run on keys too, so a handler can turn tagged keys into
friendly Python keys before they are wrapped.

```python
handlers = {"!upper": str.upper}
result = parse_yaml("!upper key: value", handlers=handlers)
assert result == {"KEY": "value"}
```

If a tagged key has no matching handler, it is preserved as a `Yaml`
key:

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, parse_yaml

parsed = parse_yaml("!custom foo: 1")
key = next(iter(parsed))
assert isinstance(key, Yaml) and key.tag == "!custom" and key.value == "foo"
```

If you anticipate tagged mapping keys that you want to process yourself,
walk the `Yaml` keys alongside the values and unwrap them as needed.

## Document streams and markers

Most YAML files contain a single YAML *document*. YAML also supports
*document streams*: multiple documents separated by `---` and
optionally closed by `...`.

### Reading multiple documents

`parse_yaml()` and `read_yaml()` default to `multi=False`. In that mode,
they stop after the first document. When `multi=True`, all documents in
the stream are returned as a list.

```python
doc_stream = """
---
doc 1
---
doc 2
"""

parsed_first = parse_yaml(doc_stream)
parsed_all = parse_yaml(doc_stream, multi=True)
assert (parsed_first, parsed_all) == ("doc 1", ["doc 1", "doc 2"])
```

### Writing multiple documents

`write_yaml()` and `format_yaml()` also default to a single document.
With `multi=True`, the value must be a sequence of documents and the
output uses `---` between documents and `...` after the final one. For
single documents, `write_yaml()` always wraps the body with `---` and a
final `...`, while `format_yaml()` returns just the body.

```python
from yaml12 import format_yaml, write_yaml

docs = ["first", "second"]
text = format_yaml(docs, multi=True)
assert text.startswith("---") and text.rstrip().endswith("...")
write_yaml(docs, path="out.yml", multi=True)
```

When `multi=False`, parsing stops after the first document—even if later
content is not valid YAML. That makes it easy to extract front matter
from files that mix YAML with other text (like Markdown).

```python
rmd_lines = [
    "---",
    "title: Front matter only",
    "params:",
    "  answer: 42",
    "---",
    "# Body that is not YAML",
]
frontmatter = parse_yaml("\n".join(rmd_lines))
assert frontmatter == {"title": "Front matter only", "params": {"answer": 42}}
```

## Writing YAML with tags

To emit a tag, wrap a value in `Yaml` before calling `format_yaml()` or
`write_yaml()`.

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, write_yaml

tagged = Yaml("1 + x", "!expr")
write_yaml(tagged)
# stdout:
# ---
# !expr 1 + x
# ...
```

Tagged collections or mapping keys work the same way:

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, format_yaml, parse_yaml

mapping = {
    "tagged_value": Yaml(["a", "b"], "!pair"),
    Yaml("tagged-key", "!k"): "v",
}
encoded = format_yaml(mapping)
reparsed = parse_yaml(encoded)

value = reparsed["tagged_value"]
assert isinstance(value, Yaml) and value.tag == "!pair" and value.value == ["a", "b"]

key = next(k for k in reparsed if isinstance(k, Yaml))
assert key.tag == "!k" and key.value == "tagged-key" and reparsed[key] == "v"
```

## Serializing custom Python objects

You can opt into richer domain types by tagging your own objects on
emit and supplying a handler on parse. Here is a round-trip for a
dataclass:

```python
from dataclasses import dataclass, asdict
from yaml12 import Yaml, format_yaml, parse_yaml

@dataclass
class Server:
    name: str
    host: str
    port: int

def encode_server(server: Server) -> Yaml:
    return Yaml(asdict(server), "!server")

def decode_server(value):
    return Server(**value)

servers = [Server("api", "api.example.com", 8000), Server("db", "db.local", 5432)]
yaml_text = format_yaml([encode_server(s) for s in servers])

round_tripped = parse_yaml(yaml_text, handlers={"!server": decode_server})
assert round_tripped == servers
```

By keeping the on-disk representation a plain mapping plus tag, you get a
stable YAML format while still round-tripping your Python types losslessly.

## Anchors

Anchors (`&id`) name a node; aliases (`*id`) copy it. `yaml12` resolves
aliases before returning Python objects.

```python
from yaml12 import parse_yaml

parsed = parse_yaml("""
recycle-me: &anchor-name
  a: b
  c: d

recycled:
  - *anchor-name
  - *anchor-name
""")

first, second = parsed["recycled"]
assert first["a"] == "b" and second["c"] == "d"
```

## Debugging

If you want to inspect how YAML nodes are parsed before conversion to
Python types, use the internal helper `yaml12._dbg_yaml()` to
pretty-print the raw `saphyr::Yaml` structures:

```python
import yaml12

yaml12._dbg_yaml("!custom [1, 2]")
```

`_dbg_yaml` is intended for debugging and may change without notice.

## (Very) advanced tags

The following YAML features are uncommon, but `yaml12` supports them for
full YAML 1.2 compliance.

### Tag directives (`%TAG`)

YAML lets you declare tag handles at the top of a document. The syntax
is `%TAG !<name>! <handle>` and it applies to the rest of the document.

```python
text = """
%TAG !e! tag:example.com,2024:widgets/
---
item: !e!gizmo foo
"""
parsed = parse_yaml(text)
assert parsed["item"].tag == "tag:example.com,2024:widgets/gizmo"
```

You can also declare a global tag prefix, which expands a bare `!`:

```python
text = """
%TAG ! tag:example.com,2024:widgets/
---
item: !gizmo foo
"""
assert parse_yaml(text)["item"].tag == "tag:example.com,2024:widgets/gizmo"
```

### Tag URIs

To specify a verbatim tag, use `!<...>` with a valid URI-like string. For
simple tags like `gizmo`, `yaml12` normalizes `!<gizmo>` to the local tag
form `!gizmo`:

```python
parsed = parse_yaml("""
%TAG ! tag:example.com,2024:widgets/
---
item: !<gizmo> foo
""")
assert parsed["item"].tag == "!gizmo"
```

### Core schema tags

Tags beginning with `!!` resolve against the YAML core schema handle
(`tag:yaml.org,2002:`). Scalar core tags (`!!str`, `!!int`, `!!float`,
`!!bool`, `!!null`, `!!seq`, `!!map`) add no information when emitting
and are normalized to plain Python values. Informative core tags
(`!!timestamp`, `!!binary`, `!!set`, `!!omap`, `!!pairs`) stay tagged so
you can decide how to handle them.

YAML 1.2 removed these informative tags from the core schema, but they are
still valid tags and occasionally useful. `yaml12` preserves them as `Yaml`
unless you supply a handler to convert them to richer Python types.

```python
from yaml12 import Yaml, parse_yaml

yaml_text = """
- !!timestamp 2025-01-01
- !!timestamp 2025-01-01 21:59:43.10-05:00
- !!binary UiBpcyBBd2Vzb21l
"""
parsed = parse_yaml(yaml_text)
assert all(isinstance(item, Yaml) for item in parsed) and (
    parsed[0].tag,
    parsed[2].tag,
) == ("tag:yaml.org,2002:timestamp", "tag:yaml.org,2002:binary")
```

Handlers can convert these to richer Python types:

```python
import base64
from datetime import datetime, timezone
from yaml12 import parse_yaml

def ts_handler(value):
    return datetime.fromisoformat(str(value).replace("Z", "+00:00")).replace(tzinfo=timezone.utc)

def binary_handler(value):
    return base64.b64decode(str(value))

converted = parse_yaml(
    yaml_text,
    handlers={
        "!!timestamp": ts_handler,
        "!!binary": binary_handler,
    },
)
assert isinstance(converted[0], datetime) and isinstance(converted[2], (bytes, bytearray))
```
